Getting your Trinity Audio player ready...

DANGER WARNING. Please share.

This photo was taken by San Mateo County Ranger Rob Cala when he was off duty on Sunday, January 18th, 2021 at Ross’s Cove.

He went down onto the beach to warn the family and the family did not know they were a stone’s throw from the giant Mavericks wave which big that day.

This family escaped. One hour later CalFire would be called to Cowell Beach, where Arunay Pruthi and his family were not so lucky.

OWN VOICE. Princeton harbor resident, Cathy Taylor, reports on the water rescue on Martin Luther King Day, Monday, 1/18/2021, at Ross’ Cove, near Half Moon Bay. Pillar Point Harbor Patrol and Cal Fire from Half Moon Bay and Pacifica participated. ~ Michelle Dragony Because if I’m choking up over sirens and rescue reports on my radio, someone else is likely heartbroken, unless they are lucky. We live next to the mighty Pacific Ocean. It is powerful, awesome, intimidating and magnificent. In the Bay Area, you often hear reports on the news – kids swept out by a sneaker wave and a father drowns trying to save them. There were several reports of people swept out just in the past week in Pescadero and the Marin Headlands all while pro-level big wave surfers were testing their talents on the mighty faces at Mavericks with a full rescue crew in attendance watching over them. The worst incidents at Mavericks were some boards broken in half. Riders in the pit were swiftly swooped up by jet-skis and ferried to safety. Beach-goers must use their own judgement when it comes to spending a day on the shores as there is no rescue crew on hand watching over them. Despite the recurring news reports, the incidents continue. There have been high surf advisories for nearly the past two weeks straight, in conjunction with king tides. While photographing Mavericks from the bluff, I witnessed harvesters on the reef get swept by a wave during a negative low tide that proved to not be so negative. They say “never turn your back on the ocean”, but I’ll take it a step further and say pick your beach carefully and check marine warnings before going. Know the tide schedule. The ocean swells and retreats throughout the day. Surprisingly, some people don’t know that. Events of today made me cry. Since I had the day off, I sat on my balcony monitoring the marine radio — one of my guilty pleasures — while soaking in the warm sun sheltered from the wind. Since I live on the harbor, I like to be aware of goings-on, thus the radio. I scan through the normal emergency channel, US Coast Guard channels, as well as the Pillar Point Harbor channel, 74. There is a secluded beach on the other side of Pillar Point bluff, Ross’ Cove. To access the beach, you have to climb the hill and then descend a winding steep dirt trail down the bluff to the beach. In other words, no rescue vehicles can access that beach. The nearest road ends at the Air Force station with no room for large vehicles to turn around. Even from the water, rescue would be difficult given the reef and rocks. I heard the call come in right after the peak of high tide for a water rescue at Ross’ Cove of a dad who went in to save his child and was having difficulty. Oh no. I grabbed my scanner (yep, another guilty radio pleasure) and turned it on to hear the land-based reports. The wails of multiple sirens began to fill the air as fire engines and other emergency vehicles made their way to the narrow road in Princeton that ends at the Air Force station. Witness Rob Cala, an off duty San Mateo Count Ranger, described what happened: “I was down there looking at the elephant seal, I noticed people and kids in an area that I perceived as obviously dangerous. I was walking that direction, to warn them to get their kids further back. At that moment the Mayhem started and the little girl was pulled into the water the dad ran in and then I was running that direction and calling 911. A man was part of the group and he ran to help her dad. He was able to secure the girl, the guy was in trouble when I ran and try to help remove the dad from the water, who was exhausted and so we were trying to drag them up as waves built and on we got them out. During this trying to advise County of what was actually happening during the action in progress. I notified rangers of what was happening to assist EMS. Thankfully they were alive, EMS arrived to transport for observation. “ Choking back tears, I listened in terrified horror as the condition of the family was relayed, however relieved that everyone was out of the water. Particularly concerning was the condition of a small young girl. As a mother myself, all my empathy vibes reached out after hearing the mom was adamant she ride in the ambulance with her daughter. It took some time for the rescue to be complete given the geographic logistics. A Polaris was employed to get victims up the narrow dirt trail and I watched as the ambulance drove away. All I can do is hope that little girl and family are ok. As a community, there have been frequent conversations about what can be done to warn visitors about the dangers of the ocean. We’ve all witnessed events like people being swept by waves breaching the space between Mavericks Beach and the harbor, completely caught unawares and not paying attention to the signs Mother Nature gives, such as wet sand and a trickle of water running through there when they come upon it. The weather has been unseasonably warm the past few days, but the ocean water is cold and a swimsuit won’t keep an unsuspecting beachgoer warm enough to survive long in the water. Can we post docents on high surf advisory days? Volunteers? What about changing the LED sign coming into town on 92 to post high surf warnings? I don’t know the answer, but I hope the guilty pleasure of listening to the radio brings more joy than sorrow in the future as people become more aware of the dangers this beautiful beast harbors if they don’t heed its power. Immediately after the fire trucks backed down the road to turn around at the parking lot and the ambulance slid past them with its precious cargo, another call came in. “Water rescue at Cowell Beach…” And the sirens wailed off in the other direction…. A 12 year old boy is still missing. ~ Cathy Taylor ~ Buy Brilliant Photos by Rob Cala, Rob Cala Media Rip Currents 101 ~ Mavericks Big Wave Season VIDEO. Watch for sneaker waves like the 2010 Mavericks Contest wave. Share these Rip Current videos with your friends who like to go to the Beach. Local CERT trainer, Michelle Dragony, has curated 3 videos that will bring you up to speed. If you see someone who is not paying attention, or does not seem to understand the danger, do take the time, to gently nudge them with the fact that at least one person dies every year at our beaches. Sneaker waves are an unanticipated coastal wave that is much greater in force and height than the waves preceding it. Drowning can happen with one wave. Mavericks Sneaker Wave 2/13/2010

Sea Valor Life Ring Buoy Stations Ribbon Cutting Ceremony in Honor of 12 Year Old Arunay Pruthi

RIBBON CUTTING. Event took place Wednesday, November 10th, 2021 at 10:30am at the Pillar Point Harbor Launch Ramp. San Mateo County Harbor District Press release: On October 15, 2021 the San Mateo County Harbor District received a Coastal Development Permit Waiver for the installation of three emergency life ring buoy stations (LRBS) within Pillar Point Harbor. The idea for the life-saving stations grew out of the tragic loss of Arunay Pruthi, a 12 year-old boy who was lost while attempting to rescue his younger brother who, while playing on the beach, was knocked off his feet and pulled into the sea by a “sneaker wave”. His little brother was rescued, but Arunay was overtaken by the heavy surf. For approximately fifteen minutes, Arunay’s family and other beachgoers watched helplessly as Arunay attempted to swim back to shore until he finally disappeared below the surface. They attempted to save him by throwing whatever items were available, including beach tents, into the water with the hope that they would provide sufficient flotation for Arunay. Sadly, none of these measures worked, and Arunay joined the unacceptable list of people who have drowned after being knocked down and pulled out to sea by sneaker waves and rough surf. Had one of these Life Ring Buoy Stations been available that day, this tragedy, and the approximately 12 annual drownings that occur along the Northern California Coastline each year due to sneaker waves, may have been prevented. The maritime search for Arunay included the U.S. Coast Guard, San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, Coastside Fire District, San Mateo County Harbor District, members of the Sea Valor Organization, Arunay’s family, and hundreds of volunteers. This team scoured the coastline from Big Sur to Bodega Bay. Sadly, during this same time period, at least three other people drowned on the nearby coastline after being swept out to sea by sneaker waves. After the search for Arunay was suspended, Arunay’s parents Tarun and Sharmistha Pruthi, worked with Sea Valor (www.SeaValor.org), the San Mateo County Harbor District, the San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, and engineer Brad Damitz to propose ways to prevent such needless drownings. Sea Valor designed and built several Life Ring Buoy Station prototypes, and a strong collaborative effort which included a unanimous “‘yes” vote by the San Mateo County Harbor District Board of Harbor Commissioners, refined the final design. The initial three Life Ring Buoy Stations will serve as a pilot program which will hopefully expand to other areas along the California Coastline. Eric Jones, Sea Valor’s founder and Executive Director adds, “What became readily apparent during the search is that more needs to be done to prevent these drownings which result from sneaker waves catching people off guard and pulling them out to sea. Our beautiful California coastline presents some unique dangers such as sneaker waves, and education and raising awareness of these unique dangers is paramount in reducing these preventable drownings. Additionally, having life ring buoys readily available on beaches or areas that are particularly dangerous, will give family members and other beachgoers an immediate and safer rescue option than entering the water themselves while waiting for the professionals to arrive. Calling 911 should always be the first thing people do in an emergency, and one of the benefits of these new stations is that they list the exact location of the station so that the person calling 911 doesn’t waste valuable time trying to figure out and tell the emergency dispatcher where they are.” “Installation of these life rings will make a profound difference by helping Northern Californians and visitors from other states stay safe on our beaches. It is the first step towards providing our community with the tools and knowledge they will need to create a more pleasant and secure beach-going experience. We want to channel our grief towards making a difference and saving other families from the pain of losing a loved one. Having lost our 12 yr old son Arunay to a sneaker wave in Jan 2021, we are dedicated to taking the safety ring campaign forward. We look forward to collaborating with San Mateo County Harbor District and other coastal counties to install these life saving stations. Arunay Foundation will continue to work towards educating young minds about beach safety, equipping our beaches with life-saving equipment, and informing the community about potentially hazardous beach conditions” stated Arunay’s father, Tarun Pruthi. Each station is approximately eight feet tall and consists of improved signage in multiple languages that warns of the dangers of sneaker waves. Additionally, each station is equipped with a life-ring buoy and 100 feet of attached line. The combination of improved signage paired with the life-ring buoys will undoubtedly improve safety awareness and will provide a much-needed means of rescueduring the critical minutes before professional rescue resources arrive on scene. “Turning a tragedy into a call to action, the Harbor District is proud to work with Sea Valor and the Arunay Foundation. These life-saving stations and buoys are a first step to improve water safety along our long, beautiful coastline in San Mateo County, to allow for situational awareness of the dangers of the mighty Pacific Ocean, and to educate visitors to be careful and cautious of water conditions on our beaches. I am proud of the Harbor Board’s leadership and vision, with its unanimous vote and commitment to coastside safety, and the collaboration between the Harbor District, San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, Coastside Fire P rotection District, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the State Parks Department. Harbor District General Manager Jim Pruett was instrumental in ensuring that all stakeholders have been included in this process to bring coastside safety to San Mateo County,” stated Virginia Chang Kiraly, President of the San Mateo County Harbor Board of Commissioners. “This collaboration is a wonderful example of all parties working together towards a common goal and providing public-s afety resources to truly help all who spend time on the San Mateo County coast.” “The San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office fully supports the installation of the safety rings at Pillar Point Harbor, and while the hope is the safety apparatus will never be needed, it is reassuring that the community will have access to these excellent life-saving tools,” San Mateo County Sheriff Carlos G. Bolanos, “and I extend my thanks to the San Mateo County Harbor District, Arunay Foundation, Sea Valor and everyone who has worked to make this initiative possible.” Eric Jones, Founder, Sea Valor, (202) 491-6000 www.seavalor.org/seavalor- sneaker-wave-safety-program/ Tarun and Sharmistha Pruthi Founders (240) 520-1216 www.arunayfoundation.org Media Contact James P. Pruett, General Manager, General Manager San Mateo County Harbor District, (650) 583-4962, [email protected] San Mateo County Harbor District Ribbon Cutting Ceremony for 3 Life Ring Buoy Stations at Pillar Point Harbor – 11:30am On October 15, the San Mateo County Harbor District received a Coastal Development Permit Waiver for the installation of three emergency life ring buoy stations (LRBS) within Pillar Point Harbor. The Harbor District will be installing three stations in the next few weeks. A ribbon cutting ceremony will be held on Wednesday, November 10th at 10:30 am at Pillar Point Harbor. Officials will be available for questioning following the ceremony. Ceremony will occur at the boat ramp. PRESS RELEASE October 27, 2021 Ribbon Cutting Ceremony to be held on Wednesday, November 10th at 10:30 AM at Pillar Point Harbor, Half Moon Bay California On October 15, 2021 the San Mateo County Harbor District received a Coastal Development Permit Waiver for the installation of three emergency life ring buoy stations (LRBS) within Pillar Point Harbor. The idea for the life-saving stations grew out of the tragic loss of Arunay Pruthi, a 12 year-old boy who was lost while attempting to rescue his younger brother who, while playing on the beach, was knocked off his feet and pulled into the sea by a “sneaker wave”. His little brother was rescued, but Arunay was overtaken by the heavy surf. For approximately fifteen minutes, Arunay’s family and other beachgoers watched helplessly as Arunay attempted to swim back to shore until he finally disappeared below the surface. They attempted to save him by throwing whatever items were available, including beach tents, into the water with the hope that they would provide sufficient flotation for Arunay. Sadly, none of these measures worked, and Arunay joined the unacceptable list of people who have drowned after being knocked down and pulled out to sea by sneaker waves and rough surf. Had one of these Life Ring Buoy Stations been available that day, this tragedy, and the approximately 12 annual drownings that occur along the Northern California Coastline each year due to sneaker waves, may have been prevented. The maritime search for Arunay included the U.S. Coast Guard, San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, Coastside Fire District, San Mateo County Harbor District, members of the Sea Valor Organization, Arunay’s family, and hundreds of volunteers. This team scoured the coastline from Big Sur to Bodega Bay. Sadly, during this same time period, at least three other people drowned on the nearby coastline after being swept out to sea by sneaker waves. After the search for Arunay was suspended, Arunay’s parents Tarun and Sharmistha Pruthi, worked with Sea Valor (www.SeaValor.org), the San Mateo County Harbor District, the San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, and engineer Brad Damitz to propose ways to prevent such needless drownings. Sea Valor designed and built several Life Ring Buoy Station prototypes, and a strong collaborative effort which included a unanimous “‘yes” vote by the San Mateo County Harbor District Board of Harbor Commissioners, refined the final design. The initial three Life Ring Buoy Stations will serve as a pilot program which will hopefully expand to other areas along the California Coastline. Eric Jones, Sea Valor’s founder and Executive Director adds, “What became readily apparent during the search is that more needs to be done to prevent these drownings which result from sneaker waves catching people off guard and pulling them out to sea. Our beautiful California coastline presents some unique dangers such as sneaker waves, and education and raising awareness of these unique dangers is paramount in reducing these preventable drownings. Additionally, having life ring buoys readily available on beaches or areas that are particularly dangerous, will give family members and other beachgoers an immediate and safer rescue option than entering the water themselves while waiting for the professionals to arrive. Calling 911 should always be the first thing people do in an emergency, and one of the benefits of these new stations is that they list the exact location of the station so that the person calling 911 doesn’t waste valuable time trying to figure out and tell the emergency dispatcher where they are.” “Installation of these life rings will make a profound difference by helping Northern Californians and visitors from other states stay safe on our beaches. It is the first step towards providing our community with the tools and knowledge they will need to create a more pleasant and secure beach-going experience. We want to channel our grief towards making a difference and saving other families from the pain of losing a loved one. Having lost our 12 yr old son Arunay to a sneaker wave in Jan 2021, we are dedicated to taking the safety ring campaign forward. We look forward to collaborating with San Mateo County Harbor District and other coastal counties to install these life saving stations. Arunay Foundation will continue to work towards educating young minds about beach safety, equipping our beaches with life-saving equipment, and informing the community about potentially hazardous beach conditions” stated Arunay’s father, Tarun Pruthi. Each station is approximately eight feet tall and consists of improved signage in multiple languages that warns of the dangers of sneaker waves. Additionally, each station is equipped with a life-ring buoy and 100 feet of attached line. The combination of improved signage paired with the life-ring buoys will undoubtedly improve safety awareness and will provide a much-needed means of rescue during the critical minutes before professional rescue resources arrive on scene. “Turning a tragedy into a call to action, the Harbor District is proud to work with Sea Valor and the Arunay Foundation. These lifesaving stations and buoys are a first step to improve water safety along our long, beautiful coastline in San Mateo County, to allow for situational awareness of the dangers of the mighty Pacific Ocean, and to educate visitors to be careful and cautious of water conditions on our beaches. I am proud of the Harbor Board’s leadership and vision, with its unanimous vote and commitment to coastside safety, and the collaboration between the Harbor District, San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office, Coastside Fire Protection District, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the State Parks Department. Harbor District General Manager Jim Pruett was instrumental in ensuring that all stakeholders have been included in this process to bring coastside safety to San Mateo County,” stated Virginia Chang Kiraly, President of the San Mateo County Harbor Board of Commissioners. “This collaboration is a wonderful example of all parties working together towards a common goal and providing public-safety resources to truly help all who spend time on the San Mateo County coast.” “The San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office fully supports the installation of the safety rings at Pillar Point Harbor, and while the hope is the safety apparatus will never be needed, it is reassuring that the community will have access to these excellent life-saving tools,” San Mateo County Sheriff Carlos G. Bolanos, “and I extend my thanks to the San Mateo County Harbor District, Arunay Foundation, Sea Valor and everyone who has worked to make this initiative possible.” The Harbor District will be installing three stations in the next few weeks in Pillar Point Harbor. A ribbon cutting ceremony will be held on Wednesday, November 10th at 10:30 am at Pillar Point Harbor. Officials will be available for questioning following the ceremony. Contact Information: James B. Pruett, General Manager San Mateo County Harbor District 650-583-4962 [email protected]

Eric Jones, Founder, Sea Valor [email protected] 202-491-6000 https://www.seavalor.org/seavalorsneaker-wave-safety-program/

Tarun and Sharmistha Pruthi, Founders Arunay Foundation 240-520-1216 arunayfoundation.org Moving Harbor Meeting Approves 2 Sea Valor Life Saving Stations in Honor of Arunay Pruthi Who Drowned at Cowell’s Beach VIDEO. From the San Mateo County Harbor District meeting 5/19/2021 at 1:00pm by Zoom. TO: Board of Harbor Commissioners FROM: John Moren, Director of Operations THRU: James B. Pruett, General Manager DATE: May 19, 2021 SUBJECT: Sea Valor Life-Saving Station Consideration Issue: Consider authorizing use of District resources to install Sea Valor life-saving stations. Recommended Motion: Motion: Authorize staff to utilize District resources to; (i) obtain all necessary permitting and cover construction costs for installation of two Sea Valor life-saving stations at Pillar Point Harbor, one at each breakwater, (ii) lead permitting efforts and cover costs for the installation of two Sea Valor life-saving stations on San Mateo County Controlled property at Mavericks Beach. Policy Implications: Consistent with the District’s ongoing efforts to ensure everything feasible is done to prevent loss of life due to drowning. Background: District GM was approached by the Sea Valor organization who proposed donating ring buoy life-saving stations to the District. District staff met with the Sea Valor representative and identified two proposed locations, one at the breakwater near Surfers Beach and one at the breakwater near Mavericks Beach. The Sea Valor organization will donate the life-saving stations. The Dist rict will be required to pay for the permitting costs and professional installation in accordance with the permitting requirements. It is estimated that total costs for the permitting and installation of the two District life-saving stations would be under $5,000. The life-saving stations consist of pole mounted throw ring buoys and warning signage. Staff temporarily set up one of the life-saving stations so the Board could see what is proposed, see below photo. The ring buoys are much like those afforded at public pools and docks for emergency use by the public. District public beach areas would be the first location for Sea Valor to have these installed. Therefore, staff are suggesting starting with only two, installed at the designated places on a trial basis. Staff are also requesting Board direction on using District funds/resources for permitting and installation of additional Sea Valor life-saving stations within the Harbor District Rescue Response Area in San Mateo County, beginning with beaches adjacent to District controlled property, Mavericks Beach to start. Recommended Motion: Staff recommends the Board consider authorizing staff to utilize District resources to; (i) obtain all necessary permitting and cover construction costs for installation of two Sea Valor life-saving stations at Pillar Point Harbor, one at each breakwater, (ii) lead permitting efforts and cover costs for the installation of two Sea Valor life-saving stations on San Mateo County Controlled property at Mavericks Beach. Attachments: 1. Sea Valor PPT Presentation A boy was swept into the ocean. His story reveals the hidden danger of California’s sneaker waves Don’t Make Me Cry ~ Multi-Jurisdiction Water Rescue at Ross’ Cove, 1 Adult, 2 Kids OWN VOICE. Princeton harbor resident, Cathy Taylor.